In this video we'll learn how to overload the copy assignment operator the assignment operator is used
by C++ when it assigns one object to another object.
Don't confuse assignment with initialization.
Initialization is done by constructors when we create new objects.
The statement my string as two equals as 1 is not an assignment statement.
It's an initialization statement because as to hasn't been created yet C++ allows us to use the assignment
operator in this context but this assignment is really equivalent to my string as to from s one as shown
in the comment.
It will invoke the copy constructor.
Notice the same it as two equals S1.
This is a sign that says as too has already been created and initialized previous to this statement.
So an assignment occurs when an object has already been initialized and you want to assign another object
to it.
C++ provides a default way of assigning one object to another.
And if you don't provide your own overloaded assignment operator then C++ will provide a compiler generated
one for you.
This is very similar to what it did with the default copy constructor.
The behavior for the default assignment is member Y's assignment which means shallow copying.
If your class doesn't have raw pointers then the default assignment operator will probably be just fine.
However in my string class we have a raw pointer so will overload the assignment operator so that a
deep copies the pointer to data on the heap.
So how exactly do we overload the copy assignment operator.
First the assignment operator must be overloaded as a member function so we can provide a method prototype
that has the general pattern shown in the top declaration.
We then simply replace type with the name of our class.
Notice that the name of the method is operator equal.
That's how we declare methods and overload operators.
The keyword operator followed by the operator that we wish to overload.
So for the String class the overloaded assignment operator method returns a reference to a String object.
This is important since we want to avoid extra copies if we return by value and we also want to allow
chain assignments such as P1 equals P2 equals P3 we'll define this method in the next slide.
But once it's defined we can write code like as two equals as one which assigns object as one to object
as to.
That's very readable and readable code and it feels exactly like if we were signing one of the C++ built
in types.
But now it's working with our own user defined classes.
That's pretty easy and pretty neat.
The compiler will actually convert the as two equals as one assignment statement to as two dot operator
equal and pass in s one behind the scenes.
Let's see how we would implement the copy assignment for my string class.
Here's the code for the overloaded copy assignment operator.
It looks complicated but it really isn't.
We'll break this down into the basic steps over the next few slides.
Remember the object on the left hand side of an assignment statement is referred to by the this pointer
and the object on the right hand side is being passed into the method I've named the right hand side
object r h.
As for right hand side to be clear since we're assigning the right hand side object to the left hand
side object we must make a deep copy of the right hand side object's attributes and copy them over to
the left hand side opposite.
So what does this mean semantically.
Well the left hand side object or this object will be overwritten.
So we need to deallocate anything it refers to on the heap.
Then we have to allocate space in the left hand side object for the right hand side object's data.
And then we finally copy the data over to the left side from the right side.
Let's go over this code one statement at a time.
Since I know it can be hard to follow when you're first learning this the first thing we want to do
is check to see if we're doing self assignment for example P one equals p 1 or a signed p one to itself.
We can easily check for that by checking the address of the left hand side object which is in the pointer
this and comparing it to the address of the right hand object.
If they're the same then we really don't want to do anything and we just return dereference this which
is the left side object.
If we don't have self assignment then we need to deallocate storage for this string since it's pointing
to a string on the heap.
We need to deallocate the storage otherwise when we copy the new data over well or from this memory
and end up with a memory leak.
Now the left side object is ready to be assigned from the data from the right side object but we haven't
yet allocated storage on the heat for the deep copy.
So we need to allocate enough storage on the heap that's the size of the string and the right object
plus one since we need the space for the stream Terminator.
That's it.
Now we can do the copy we can perform the copy by copying over one character of time until we see the
null character.
But since we're using a C-style string we can simply call the string library method stood stream copy
which copies the string from the right hand side object to the left hand side object.
That's it we're done all we have to do now is return the left side object so we can support chain assignment.
This may seem like a lot at first but it's a pattern or idiom that we always use in C++ when we're doing
deep copy assignment.
In this case we only have a single raw pointer.
If your class has multiple raw pointers then don't forget to copy each of them.
Let's go over to the idea and step through copy assignment using the debugger so you can see exactly
how this works in life code.
Ok so I'm back in the ID and in this case I'm in the section 14 workspace and I'm in the my string Dasch
copy Dasch assignment project what we want to do now is we've got our mystery in class and it's really
basic right now it's only got the constructor's the copy constructor.
The couple of getters and the display just as we've seen before and what we want to do is we want to
add the copy assignment operator we want to overload that an added to the class but before we do that
let's talk about the semantics of exactly what we're trying to achieve.
So I've written four lines of code right here in my main.
I've actually got a lot more in the main which I will comment out later.
So let's talk about these four lines of code and talk about it in the context of assignment.
You can see what's going on here.
I'm instantiating my object a it's a my string object and I'm initializing a total though.
So when this line executes I will have something like this.
I have my object it will have an s t r attribute which is a pointer.
Hello will be allocated on the heap.
Remember there's a null character there and so this is really six characters big and that as TR attribute
will be pointing to it.
So that's the condition that I'll be in.
After the construction of the object then when we create the B object will be in a situation like this
where this will be B.
This will be here again.
In this case I'm pointing to an empty stream because that's the how we defined are no args constructor
so will be something like that.
Remember the empty string consists of a single character with no character in it.
Then we're going to execute this code right here B equals or assign a to b.
In this case this is a assignment because B already exists B has been instantiated.
So what we want to happen is.
Couple of things first we want to be sure that we're not assigning to ourselves B equals B or A equals
a.
That's easy to do then what we'll do is we really want B to contain that hello right.
But we don't want this situation like we had with a shallow copy.
We want to create a copy of that Helo string on the heap.
So in order to do that there's a couple of things I need to do.
First of all I need to deallocate this right and this can be a lot bigger than just an empty string.
This could be a very large string.
So I want to deallocate that.
Then I want to allocate space for 6 characters right because I'm copying Hello in there and hello as
H E L L O and the null terminator.
I want to be in this situation.
I want to copy hello over and at this point.
What we've got is this kind of situation.
All this is gone now that's been deallocated so we don't leak memory there.
And this is where we want to be with B.
OK so that's where we're headed you can see the steps that we need to do visually here.
We're going to do them in code next.
Now this example here is also an assignment because we're assigning something to B and B already exists.
In this case it's a little bit different because we don't have an operator equal that expects a character
pointer right which is what this is right here C-style string.
So what we need to do is we need to construct a temporary object using the overloaded constructor just
like what we did over here and then assigned that temporary object to B and then that will eventually
be destroyed the temporary object well.
So that's it that's where we're going.
Let me clear this and liberals start writing the code now and then once we're done we'll walk through
this example.
So let's start with our header file.
What we need to do is we need to write the prototype here and I'll leave a little bit of extra space.
What's really clear for the overloaded assignment operator.
So we know it returns a string object by reference.
We know that the name is operator equal.
That's just the way we name operator methods in C++.
That just tells the compiler they are overloading the equal or assignment operator.
What does it expect.
Well the right hand side remember the left hand side is this it's a pointer or the current object.
The right hand side is simply going to be a constant.
My string reference and all the right hand side we don't have to provide a name here in the prototype.
I just say copy assignment.
That's our prototype again.
Be really sure that you understand this.
We're overloading the equal operator or the assignment operator.
The left hand side is the current object.
The right hand side is what we're signing and we want this guy because we really don't want to mess
with it it's not our object so I don't want to mess with it at all.
Also remember this is not construction.
This is assignment that left hand side already exists.
Ok so now let's write the code for that copy assignment.
Now I've made a little room here so that I can put in the code and we've also got some break points
so I've already gone ahead and put one in.
So what we'll do is we're now going to implement.
That's all my string right where returning a reference.
And this is operator equal.
What does it expect just like the prototype conc to my string reference right hand side.
Now the first thing I want to do is I just want to do a little output statement so that we know when
this is being called.
So I'll just say stood out and will just say something like copy assignment
just stood in line.
Perfect.
So what do we need to do first.
Well first thing we need to do is make sure that we're not assigning to ourselves.
That's simple enough.
If this I remember this is a pointer to the current object.
So if a pointer holds an address so if this is the address of the right hand side.
In other words we're really the same object.
Then all I want to do is just return this.
OK and we need to dereference this in this case.
Remember if we just say return this this won't compile because then that means that this guy would be
expecting a pointer back but we're.
We're doing a reference back not a pointer.
So we're going to pass the reference back.
That's it.
Now we start doing the real work first thing we need to do is remember that this object is the one that's
being copied into.
So it may be pointing to something right that as TR attribute maybe pointing to a string in it.
Actually it is pointing to a string even if it's just an empty string.
So what we need to do is just delete and make sure you use the brackets here because it's an array of
characters we're deleting as TR.
OK if this makes it more clear then feel free to use this keyword right there.
It's all the same.
Then we're going to say s t r equals new character ready to allocate to that array of characters on
the heap.
And how many characters do we need to allocate.
Well we're copying the right hand side object data into it right.
So the right hand side object has an as TR attribute.
So how big that string is plus one because we need space for the string Terminator.
So how big is this going to be.
Well it's going to be
take the string length of not as TR Right but right hand side as TR.
And since we're a member method we have access to that and we want to add one.
Perfect So now we've allocated the space that we need on the heap.
The only thing left really is to copy that string over from the right hand side and just return.
So let's do that.
So what do Studd string copy to.
As TR again you could say this to your if that's clear from our H.S. right hand side string.
So that's the string copy string copy function simply copies one character at a time until it hits the
terminating character.
It copies that as well when it's done and the last thing to do is just return the object that we just
copied into the left hand side.
That's it.
Let's go and run this.
But before we do that let's actually debug it.
So I'm going to go back to my man and let's start the debugger.
So this is where we're at.
Let's step through this so we can really understand what's going on here.
At this point I'm on line 10.
I'm constructing or instantiating that object right and I'm providing some initialization information
the string.
So in this case I'm going to call the overloaded constructor.
So let's do that.
Let's step through.
There is the call to the overloaded constructor that expects a character pointer just like we expect.
It's not no.
So we're going to skip the part and we're right here.
So how many characters would we allocating for this guy.
Well whatever the string that was being passed in by post one for the null terminator and then we're
just copying it over.
So let's step through this and when we get back here you can see that a right here that s t tr attribute
is pointing to the string Hello exactly like we expected.
The B object.
Same idea except recalling a no args constructor since we're not providing any permission and when we
get back we expect B's string attribute to be an empty string.
So let's do that.
There you can see the no args constructor.
It's simply creating one character and putting the null terminator in there.
So at this point you can see that Bay is hello and B is that empty string right here.
Now is the assignment of assigning a to b.
So let's step through this.
We expect operator equal to be called and that's exactly what happens right here on 938 of the copy
assignment overloaded method.
We display copy assignment.
We're going to check for self assignment here we don't have self assignments so that will be skipped.
Now we're going to delete the left hand side objects.
String on the heap.
So we're deleting that and at this point we're going to copy and you can see that the right hand side
is hello and the left hand side right now is just pointing to garbage right.
Because we've deleted that so it's invalid memory we're really pointing anywhere right now.
So what we're going to do is simply replace that with an area that I'm creating on the heap that's going
to store the string that I'm just about to copy.
So let's do that now and then we're going to copy that string over.
So at this point I'll refresh here.
You can see that right hand side was still hello and now this is also Hello.
And there you go.
You can see from the addresses that they are indeed two unique areas in memory returning the object
by reference and that's it.
I'll refresh the site again and now we've got a and b and they should be the same a as Hello B is hello.
And there again two different areas in memory.
This example here.
What's going to happen is unlined 14 is going to call the overloaded operator again to create that object
and then once that object is created will assign it over so that temporary object is going to be assigned
to cover so let's just walk through that really quickly here and you can see right here I'm calling
the overloaded constructor which is going to create a temporary object and now that temporary object
will be assigned so you can see the assignment operator being called now.
So I walk through that again.
We see what we're at.
We move it over and we get rid of the temporary object that's the destructor being called right there.
That's it.
So we're done here.
You can see a hello and B is.
Now this is a test.
And as we unwind we're going to call the destructor for B and the destructor for a in our program is
done OK.
So that gives you an idea of the assignment operator and the copy assignment operator is pretty straightforward.
And what I've also done is I've created some other test cases here that you can walk through and learn
from.
And what I'll do as I'll just uncomment them out and then I'll run the program rather quickly.
So what I've got is I've just got some examples of creating more objects and assigning objects to vectors
and so forth.
And you can see that when we do things like as equals change we're going to create a copy assignment
and that's exactly what we want we don't really want to create that guy using the conversion constructor
and then use a copy constructor to copy stuff over.
We're just doing assignment and we don't want to do anything related to shallow assignment right.
We want to do deep assignment.
Otherwise we're going to end up with all kinds of problems.
So I'll run this and there's the output.
You can see that we've got copy assignment happening we've got Larry a bunch of times and like I said
you can run through this and walk through it yourselves.
It's really important that you step through a program like this he could really really understand what's
going on.
But you can see that copy assignment is called all over the place here because that's exactly what we
want.
OK so now in the next video what we'll do is we'll do move assignment which is pretty powerful and it'll
take care of assigning temporary values much more efficiently than capias son.